Note regarding encoder signal conditioning

July 6/20  G. D. (Joe) Young <jyoung@islandnet.com>


For simple mechanical rotary encoders such as the Bournes PEC11, the A and B
signals are produced by a pair (or more) of contacts sliding across a pattern 
of metal areas separated by insulating space areas. As a consequence of this 
action, the A and B output signals may be corrupted by momentary make and break
of the sliding contact, which may become worse with age-accumulated wear, dirt,
etc. This also means that an erroneous code can occur at any time during a 
cycle of rotation, and not just near the edge transitions, and thus really 
should not be called contact bounce in the usual sense of a switch operation.

Given the nature of the noisy signal, the concept employed in the Rotary 
library--state table driven--which essentially ignores invalid states is likely
near best practice. By way of contrast, the 'debounce' method employed in my
examples--jrotaryshra, say--which just waits for a msec or so before reading 
the encoder state, will not be immune from these mid-state errors.

The PEC11 rotary encoder datasheet has a recommended signal conditioning 
circuit consisting of a pair of resistors and a capacitor. As shown, this
circuit has time constant 10K x .01uF for falling edges, and twice that for
the rise. Thus the filter is more effective against contacts lifting off the
closed state. In the schematics illustrating using the shrPort expander's
interrupt capability, this altered filtering further exaggerates the 
difference in time constant, and also allows the processor or expander input
pullup to be drawn low enough to register as a LOW logic level. Also, this 
filtering with a resistance always in series with the closed contact is kinder
to the encoder contacts--by limiting the capacitor discharge current--than 
simply connecting a capacitor across the contact would be. With the circuit
recommended by the manufacturer the current handled by the encoder contacts
varies from a maximum of 5V/5K = 1 mA at initial closure to 0.5 mA when the
capacitor is fully discharged. With the modified circuit it depends a bit on
the input pullup value, but will be approximately 1 mA at initial closure and
decline to about the pullup current plus 0.1 mA from the 51K.




